[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: One of the
most misunderstood aspects
of a healthy diet
is fats and oils.
There's been so much
controversy over the subject
that people throw up
their hands and look
for a bag of potato chips to
ease the pain of confusion.
Fortunately, recent news is
that the government is finally
acknowledging the problem.
[BEGIN VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>They are the ingredients that
make cookies and cakes taste
better and pie crust flakier.
But today, the Food
and Drug Administration
says trans fats are no
longer recognized as safe
and the FDA intends to ban them.
>>With the FDA's
announcement about trans fat,
you probably wonder what
are trans fats doing
in our food in the first place?
It's all about taste,
texture, a longer shelf life.
They basically make processed
foods taste really good.
But there's a downside.
It raises bad cholesterol,
lowers the good kind,
and leads to 20,000
heart attacks
and 7,000 deaths a year.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Udo Erasmus,
author of "Fats That Heal,
Fats That Kill", is here to
give us the ultimate overview
of what kind of fats our brains
and bodies absolutely need
and which ones will
create ill health.
Udo, welcome.
We go way back.
>>UDO ERASMUS: Nice to be here.
>>REGINA: We've been on
programs over the last 15 years.
And when I did my show,
"Regina's Vegetarian
Table" on PBS and
wrote those cookbooks,
it was based solely
on your method
of not destroying fats and
creating trans fats, which is--
>>ERASMUS: Right.
>>REGINA: --another
half of the subject
we're going to get into.
But this is huge, that report,
how do you eliminate trans fats
from what we know on
the shelves today?
I mean the shelves
would be empty.
>>ERASMUS: Well, we've
already gone a ways
to get that done because
this has been going on.
But they were in
the food supply.
They were invented in 1911.
That's when they were patented.
And they never had to
be put on the labels.
So you didn't know that
they were even in there.
The only way you
could find out is
if you added all the other
fats together and then
the total fat, subtracted
that from the total fats.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ERASMUS: And what was left
over was the trans fats.
But they didn't
have to be labeled.
>>REGINA: But the
thing-- go ahead.
Yeah.
>>ERASMUS: And then Harvard
School of Public Health,
Walter Willett and
his group, they
did a bunch of experiments.
Put their neck on the
line, because this
was a big industry,
and publicized
all the dangers they have.
There's more.
There's not just heart attacks.
But they interfere
with immune function.
They interfere with
reproduction in animals.
We haven't done human
studies on that.
And they are worse for diabetes.
So there's lots of
problems that they cause.
And so gradually
they're taking them out.
But now if you go on an
airplane and they give you
those crackers and cookies,
they don't have to be labeled.
So they're putting the
trans fats in there.
>>REGINA: Wait.
Wait.
OK, now why did they
not have to be labeled?
>>ERASMUS: Well, it's
because they're little
and they hand them out to you.
>>REGINA: Oh, I see.
Because they hand them out.
>>ERASMUS: That's
your snack, right?
>>REGINA: But you're talking
Nabisco and those companies.
Which I would think
that if they're
having to remove the trans fats
from their main product line,
why would they add them back
in for these little snack
packs for example?
>>ERASMUS: Well,
because they still
have machinery that makes them.
>>REGINA: Oh.
Well, I guess that's
pretty simple.
But if you look at--
>>ERASMUS: The government didn't
say take the machinery down.
>>REGINA: But if you
go to a supermarket
and you look at the aisles
and aisles and aisles
of processed foods, whether
it's a package Mac and Cheese,
or whether it's a cake mix,
pre-made cookies, breads,
and so forth, still at this
time most of those products
have trans fats in them.
>>ERASMUS: Yup.
Well, many of them do.
>>REGINA: Many of them do.
And then the ones that don't
will usually now post it
on the label, no trans fats.
I mean if you've gone
to that trouble--
>>ERASMUS: But even that's not
true because you can have half
a percent of trans
fats in them or 0.49%--
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: --and then you
round to the next whole number.
So you can have trans
fats in it and the label
will say no trans fats.
>>REGINA: Wow.
So that's not totally
clean information either.
>>ERASMUS: Because it's
labeling rules, right?
>>REGINA: And so
now-- remind me--
we're going to go into
something in a little bit.
I'll show you a sign I saw
outside of Whole Foods.
But when does that
labeling law finally
take effect, where
everything must
be labeled if it has trans fats?
>>ERASMUS: I think it's
being done state by state.
>>REGINA: So like 2016?
>>ERASMUS: It's in the process.
>>REGINA: It's in
the process, OK.
And I know you've been fighting
with this for a long time,
just putting your work
out there and trying
to tell the truth behind it.
And before we go
any further, I'd
like you to tell the tale of
what happened to you when you
were young and foolish, as a
gardener that wasn't wearing
shoes and stepping through
pesticides all day.
Just give us that
bit of story so we
can help the people
understand the organic nature
of how you learned this.
>>ERASMUS: Well, there's
nothing like a personal disaster
to get your attention.
I was spraying pesticides.
And I was doing it
very carelessly.
And the reason why is because
I was very emotionally
upset because my
marriage had broken up
and so I wanted
to kill something.
So I took a job as
a pesticide sprayer.
>>REGINA: And was this
at Butchart Gardens?
>>ERASMUS: No, no, no.
I was doing it commercially--
>>REGINA: Commercially, OK.
>>ERASMUS: --at different
places all around Vancouver,
in Canada.
And I was really careless.
And I would literally
walk barefoot
through the lawns I had sprayed.
And people would say to
me, aren't you worried?
I said, nah, I'm immune.
And then the skin
started peeling off
the bottom of my feet.
So I said, OK, maybe
that's not a good idea.
So then I wore rubber boots.
But I was vain.
And it was a summer job
and I'm very fair skinned.
I always wanted to have a tan.
So I would do my spraying,
wearing a bathing suit
and rubber boots.
And I had a tractor
with a big tank.
And I'd be spraying everywhere.
And I could feel the wind
drift the spray on my back.
And I just didn't care.
And the predictable
thing happened.
Three years later,
I got poisoned
by the pesticides I sprayed.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
You think.
>>ERASMUS: So now the
doctor couldn't help me
because they don't
have anything for that.
And so that was
the day I realized,
oh, my health is actually
my responsibility.
And if I don't care
about it, nobody does.
So I then started
reading because I
have a really good background
in biological sciences,
biochemistry, genetics.
So I can read all that stuff.
And I started looking
in the journals,
in the research journals, about
health and nutrition, disease
and nutrition.
And why that?
Because if your body is made out
of food, water, and air, then
probably the first place to look
when something isn't working
is that the quality of
the food, water, and air
that you're making
the body out of.
>>REGINA: Un-huh.
>>ERASMUS: And then I got
stuck on fats because-- or oils
particularly.
Because oils are our
most sensitive nutrients,
they should be treated
with the most care.
They are actually treated
with the least care.
When industry makes oils,
they squeeze the oil out
or they dissolve it
out with a solvent,
whichever way they do it.
And then they treat the oil
with Drano, sodium hydroxide;
phosphoric acid, which
is window washing acid.
Then they bleach the oil.
That makes it rancid.
Now, it smells bad.
And to clean up the
rancidity, they heat the oil
to frying temperature,
sometimes as high as 425 degrees
Fahrenheit.
This is like the high end
of frying temperature.
So I would say, as
a summary, that oil
has been treated with Drano,
window washing acid, bleach,
then fried before it
went in the bottle.
>>REGINA: And these are
your average cheap oils
you find in the grocery store.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
Everything except
extra virgin olive oil.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ERASMUS: It's treated
by a different process.
So when I found that out, then
found out 1% of the molecules
are damaged, they turn
from natural to unnatural.
Life never made a
program for molecules
that didn't exist in nature.
They accumulate in
the body with age.
And they also accumulate
up the food chain.
And I'm sick.
And I'm saying, OK, I can't
get healthy on oils like that.
We should be making them
with health in mind.
So I developed methods that take
care of these sensitive oils
while they're being made and
also how they're being used.
>>REGINA: So why oils though?
How did oils come
into the portrait
of healing from toxicity
from pesticides?
>>ERASMUS: Well, I was
looking at everything.
But oils became the one
that nobody was addressing.
And they're the most sensitive.
And I'm the kind of guy that
when I have a bunch of choices,
I say, OK, which
one am I going to do
that will do the most good?
And oils are going to be
the one because-- and now
it's pretty clear-- more health
problems come from the damaged
oils and the way we use those
oils in food preparation
than any other
part of nutrition.
That means if we do it right--
so we make them with health
in mind and we don't
use them for frying--
then more health benefits
will come from giving the oils
the care they need--
>>REGINA: That makes sense.
>>ERASMUS: --than any
other part of nutrition.
>>REGINA: Because
it's a super food.
It comes from nuts.
It comes from seeds.
>>ERASMUS: So why would I not
want to be involved with that.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Yeah.
Sure.
Exactly.
OK.
So you did ultimately,
through using
the proper kinds of
healthy oils and so forth,
restore your health.
But you went on
and you really have
spent the rest of
your life telling
the story of healthy oils.
>>ERASMUS: I spend
a good part of it.
Although I'm interested in
the whole field of health--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: --and including
not just the physical,
but the mental, all of that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: But this
was for me, that
was my first step because
I knew I could do this.
And I wasn't ready yet
to do the bigger project.
But I started in 1980.
So I've spent 30 years on it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, 30 years.
>>ERASMUS: The book
was published in 1986.
I developed flax oil in
1986 with some other people.
And then I developed a
blend of all the good things
from oils and none
of the bad things.
I developed that in 1994.
>>REGINA: And that's
in your Udo's Oil.
>>ERASMUS: That's Udo's Oil.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Which is a very high
quality product.
Let's talk about what
happened though while you
were doing that and focusing
on the importance of fats
and good fats in the diet.
At the same time, fats
were being demonized.
And we had these crazy
pyramids, these food pyramids,
that had this much fat and
this much grain and carbo-- OK.
Here's one of the old pyramids.
So basically at the bottom, aha,
lots of pasta, lots of bread,
lots of crackers.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
They put the carbs
on the bottom.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Six to seven servings a day.
>>ERASMUS: So you should
eat lots of carbs they say
and you should eat
very little oil.
>>REGINA: I mean
look at that now.
Six to seven servings of bread,
cereal, rice, and so forth.
Three to five of vegetables.
And then as you get into
your proteins and fats,
much, much less.
Now, let's talk
about what happened
to the population
of this country,
in Canada, when we
started adopting that.
>>ERASMUS: This came out
of the McGovern Report.
I think that was published
in the '70s or '80s.
And a lot of people
followed it because that's
the guideline from
the government for how
we should eat.
So people started eating
more and more carbs.
Of course, all the
carb manufacturers
were extremely happy.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: Right.
And people started
avoiding fats.
And part of the reason
they started avoiding fats
is people thought
that if you eat fat,
you're going to get fat.
>>REGINA: Well, there was
a saying, fat begets fat.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah-- fat.
Yeah.
And there's a logic to
it that's really simple.
It just turns out it's not true.
That's not how biology works.
>>REGINA: No.
Grains beget fat.
>>ERASMUS: So we ate less
fats and we ate more carbs.
And in 20 years,
overweight in North America
went from 25% to 65%
of the population.
>>REGINA: There you go.
>>ERASMUS: And in
all that time, nobody
questioned the principles
on which that was based.
They said if everybody is
eating more carbs and less fats
and they're getting fatter,--
>>REGINA: Uh-huh.
>>ERASMUS: --then it
can't be the carbs--
I mean it can't be the
fats that are doing that.
>>REGINA: Right.
Yeah.
And that extended to
Canada, Australia.
That was also in Great Britain.
And the same phenomena
happened, massive weight gain.
>>ERASMUS: It basically
traveled around the world.
It's just that we're at 65%,
maybe a little higher now.
And in Europe,
they're only at 50%.
And in Asia, they're
at maybe 30% now.
But they're all heading
in that same direction,
pushing the carbs.
This is the Canadian--
>>REGINA: And this is the
same version of it in Canada.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
We call it the grainbow.
The biggest thing is the grains.
And then fats again
are the littlest part.
>>REGINA: Well, if you go
back to follow the money--
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --those
products on the outside
are much less expensive
to produce, especially
when using trans fats.
Those are highly profitable.
Breads and pastries
and things like this
that are mass produced
are much more profitable
than the organic-- and I don't
mean under organic procedures,
but nature growing these other
nutrients and offering them.
>>ERASMUS: Well, I think
carbs are easier to grow,
like if you're mass producing.
Of course, that's not
how it was in nature
before we invented agriculture.
Grains were actually
hard to find.
You didn't have fields of
wheat, and potatoes, and rice,
and grains, and
all of that stuff.
>>REGINA: You can't produce it.
I know that those
are highly profitable
and you'd see them
sitting there.
>>ERASMUS: But the other
thing is they're stable.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's true.
They don't go bad.
There's no lifeforce.
>>ERASMUS: You can
dry carbohydrates.
You can flip them on
a shelf for five years
and take the dust off after
five years and eat them.
And they're still going to have
some food value, energy, fuel
value.
You cannot do that with oils.
>>REGINA: No, you can't.
And not only that, you can't
do that with those products.
>>ERASMUS: And you can't
do that with fresh foods.
>>REGINA: No, you can't.
And I love really well-made
breads and things like that.
I bake.
I make little gluten-free
cakes and everything.
But if those products
we're seeing there
had the complete,
natural oils in them,
they would not have shelf life.
>>ERASMUS: Oh, that's correct.
So they take the grain and
they take the germ out.
And then the oil is in the germ.
That would make the grain go
rancid when you ground it up.
So they take that out.
They actually remove all
the oil from the grain
in order to give this
flour a shelf life.
>>REGINA: Uh-huh.
>>ERASMUS: But what's
also interesting
about this is that
carbohydrates are actually
the least important
food in our diet.
And why do I say that.?
Well, oils, there are
essential nutrients
that you have to get from oils.
There are essential
amino acids that you
have to get from protein.
There are essential
minerals and vitamins
that you have to get
from whole foods.
There is nothing
in carbohydrates
that you can't get elsewhere.
There are no essentials
carbohydrates.
That makes them the
least important food.
They're good for fuel.
But if you eat more than you
burn, and 65% of the population
does-- what I say to people is
if you eat carbohydrates either
you burn them or you're
going to wear them.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ERASMUS: Because the body is
forced to turn them into fat.
So I sometimes also call
them undeclared fats.
Because you think you're
eating carbs to get slim.
But you're actually
eating something--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: --your body,
it doesn't look like fat
when you eat it.
But your body turns it into fat.
>>REGINA: Turns it into fat.
>>ERASMUS: And then
you get fat anyway.
>>REGINA: Well, we're going
to talk about the fats that
are the good fats and the
fats that are the bad fats.
But there's a picture
I took at Whole Foods,
in front of Whole
Foods the other day.
I was going to get some fruit.
This one, no artificial
trans fats since 2003.
Trans fats are trans fats.
What does that mean,
"artificial trans fats."
>>ERASMUS: I'm not
sure what that means.
I'm not sure what that
means other than saying
dairy products have
some trans fats in them,
a very small amount.
I figured out one day to
get 3 grams of trans fats
from butter, you have to eat
a pound and a quarter a day.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And we'll get to
the cooking of it.
>>ERASMUS: And if
you get it from beef,
you'd have to eat a lot more
beef than that to get it.
>>REGINA: A whole cow, yeah.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
So those are natural trans fats.
So maybe what they're
saying is, well, we
have dairy products that
have trans fats in them.
But we have no artificial
trans fats since 2003.
>>REGINA: But if you could
go into Whole Foods-- and I
don't know about this.
I mean tell me--
in any health food
store, the oils they
have on their shelves,
if they have canola
oil, and safflower,
and sunflower, and all
these oils, are they
generally untreated oils?
Because those have to be
refrigerated and they're not
refrigerated.
They're sitting on the shelves.
No.
But you're mixing
up two concepts.
The trans fats--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: --you will
find very small amounts
in oils that have been
heated to high temperatures.
So all of the cooking and salad
oils that people usually have,
that are on the shelf, they
all have a little bit in it.
But you can round it down to
zero because it's maybe not 1%.
So you will have some, but
labeling laws allow that.
The place where you would find
a lot of trans fats in a product
called CLA, that is made out of
sunflower and sesame-- sorry,
sunflower and safflower oils.
And they artificially heat
it to high temperature
and the molecule twists.
That's how you get
a trans fatty acid.
>>REGINA: Are those omega-6s?
>>ERASMUS: These are omega-6s.
And 70% of CLA is
trans fatty acids.
>>REGINA: 70%?
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
So if a store has those
in them, then they
have trans fats in them.
Those would be artificially
made trans fats.
>>REGINA: So when
that sign says that,
if they were to offer
the products, the CLA,
of one of the companies
that produces CLA--
>>ERASMUS: That would
be in contradiction
to what that says.
>>REGINA: That's in
contradiction to that sign.
>>ERASMUS: But I don't
know if they have it.
>>REGINA: I don't either.
I'm just trying to find
out what does that mean.
OK.
Because we have a
few different things.
So we have the artificial
trans fats, which are added in,
as you say, on occasion
to dairy and so forth.
Then we have the
processing of oils.
They're totally denuded.
When you were talking about
that earlier in the show,
until you get to the
point where they actually
have to heat it up to 425, are
their trans fats in those oils?
>>ERASMUS: No.
>>REGINA: They may
have residues--
>>ERASMUS: Because they're not
naturally present in the seeds.
>>REGINA: --of Drano and things.
But-- no.
>>ERASMUS: The remnants.
>>REGINA: I don't know.
I mean are there
really any remnants
of these solvents in these oils?
>>ERASMUS: When you
mix something in water,
you can never get
it like 100% out.
There's always going to
be a little bit, traces.
In those amounts,
sodium hydroxide is OK.
It's not like good.
It's not like you want it.
But sodium is essential.
Hydroxides are part of nature.
So they're not
going to harm you.
The phosphoric acid,
all the pieces of that,
very small remnants.
But it's never completely out.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: Trans fat has to
be less than half a percent.
Then you don't have to
put them on the label.
And you will have them in
those oils because of the heat
that they've heated to.
>>REGINA: So you don't want
to have standard grocery store
oils that have been
through this really
harsh and aggressive process?
>>ERASMUS: Me, personally?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ERASMUS: I don't use them.
I don't use them at all.
Because you can get oils
the way nature makes them,
the way life understands
how to use them
and what to do with them.
You can get those
from seeds and nuts.
You can get that from
certain animals that you eat,
if you eat animals.
And it depends on what they
get fed that determines that.
So wild animals are likely to
be better in their oil content
than farmed animals.
And you can get
it from oils that
are made with health
in mind, that are not
treated with Drano, window
washing acid, bleached,
and fried.
And those oils will be
much better for you anyway.
So you can get them
from many sources.
You don't have to depend on
all those cooking and salad
oils that have been damaged.
>>REGINA: Right.
And then we're going to
talk a little bit later
about the actual
process that you
need to use when you're using
them in any kind of cooking.
But first of all, let's
talk about olive oil.
We have a little clip
of a film in a second
here about the old fashioned
way to make olive oil.
Because that's the
most ubiquitous
of all of the healthy oils.
Let's talk about where
an olive oil has turned
unhealthy though.
>>ERASMUS: The thing that's
made olive oil so unbelievably
popular is that it
is the only oil that
is commonly available,
widespread available,
that has not been treated with
Drano, window washing acid,
bleached, and fried before
it went in the bottle.
Because the method
used-- the oil
comes out of the flesh,
not out of the seed.
So you don't need
those processes.
So they make it in
a different way.
And so that olive oil is
not damaged if it's fresh.
>>REGINA: And then how do we
know when we're looking at it.
Some of it is almost clear.
It just says olive oil.
The other says extra
virgin olive oil.
It'll have more
flavor, more color.
>>ERASMUS: Extra virgin,
it should be green
or it should be the color
of the olives it comes from.
It should have the olive flavor.
You can take that oil
and treat it with Drano,
window washing acid,
bleach it, and fry it
and then you get
clear olive oil.
And now what people are
also doing-- some people--
is because olive
oil is so popular,
but the trees grow
really slowly,
so the world supply is
not as big as the demand--
so what many people now do is
they mix the oil with canola
oil, or soybean oil, or the
cheapest damaged oil they can.
They still sell it as olive oil.
And so there's a lot
of cheating going on.
And the way you
know whether they've
done that or not, if the oil
doesn't get hard in the fridge
or at least get flecks of--
>>REGINA: Globules
that are solids, yeah.
>>ERASMUS: --flecks
in the fridge,
then they've put in an oil
that keeps it more liquid.
>>REGINA: And so
that would be one
of the bad oils, the cheap oils.
>>ERASMUS: That will
be a doctored oil.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Now, let's take a look
at this little video.
I just love it.
It's from Oliflix, which
is a very small mill.
There aren't that many left.
This one is in Spain.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
And this is showing the process
by which they make the oil.
And we'll see it
in a minute here.
Well, you can see it
in the background.
It's I think made of granite.
It's an old stone grist
mill made of granite.
Let's just see here.
There we go, mashing the olives.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
And why granite?
Because in a thousand
years, those same stones
will still be doing it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Right.
And then it's taken and it goes
through this kind of a mesh.
It almost looks like a
burlap, this mesh here.
It goes through this mesh.
And you can see it's dripping
down there on the sides.
A very primitive
process this is.
And that's olive oil
I buy, by that way.
And this is the most
exquisite tasting olive
oil I have ever had.
And that's it.
That's your oil.
It's bottled.
It's captured and
then it's bottled.
>>ERASMUS: And before the
big oil industry started,
they would do similar
things with other seeds.
They'd have like a
wedge, a wedge press.
You put a wooden wedge.
It's a hardwood.
And then they would just
go and hit it with a mallet
and that would squish the
seeds, a little bit of oil
would drop out.
And the lady at the
house or the estate
would go do laundry and
then feed cows or whatever
and come back.
Bang.
Every time she went by
there, she would bang it.
And then a few drops
of oil would come out.
That's how cold pressed
oils were originally made.
That's where the
term comes from.
They were actually
called cold hammered
because they hammered the oil.
>>REGINA: And we didn't
consume a lot of them
because they were so precious
and so time consuming
to both grow and to make.
>>ERASMUS: And they
knew that that oil
doesn't have a oil shelf life.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ERASMUS: So they did it on a
daily basis or a weekly basis.
>>REGINA: Oh, and the flavor.
>>ERASMUS: And then
when the big presses
came along, they wanted
to make tons of it,
make it really fast.
They then called it cold
pressed because they wanted
to give the indication that this
oil is as good as the oil that
was made in the
wedge without heat.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: And so they
called it cold pressed.
But they never defined the term.
So you can call
anything cold pressed.
And then they wanted
a long shelf life
because oils by nature
have a short one.
And that's why they got into
Drano, window washing acid,
bleached, and fried because
they would remove things
that make the oil spoil faster.
And those are for shelf
life, not for health.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So that company, the
one we saw the video,
I just put it because that's my
favorite olive oil, the Olifix.
But other than them--
there are other companies
that are still doing it
this old fashioned way.
But when you do it that
way, don't a lot of them,
the nut oils in particular,
have to be refrigerated?
>>ERASMUS: If you
do it that way--
>>REGINA: Un-huh.
>>ERASMUS: --they would
have to be refrigerated.
>>REGINA: So when you
find them in your store,
if you're going to
find a natural oil,
you will find it in the
refrigerated section?
>>ERASMUS: No.
What we created in
terms of making oils
with health in mind, they
refrigerate it in the factory.
They're in cold
storage in the factory.
They're cold storage
in the store.
You keep them in
the refrigerator.
And you never use
them for frying.
>>REGINA: Right
>>ERASMUS: So we're using
oils very different.
You cook -- go back
to cooking in water.
And you add the oil when
the food comes off the heat.
So, yeah, they need
to be refrigerated.
It's the only way you can get
a long shelf life on them.
And if you want a really long
shelf life, like the two year
that they want for
the cooking oils,
you have to freeze them
and freeze them solid.
When you freeze them solid,
molecules don't move,
reactions don't happen, and
you get your two or three year
shelf.
But they need that
kind of care if you
want them to retain
their health benefits.
By nature, they have them.
But when you put them
through all that stuff,
they lose a lot of
their health benefits.
>>REGINA: Before we get to
what you just kind of alluded
to a moment ago about
not cooking with them--
most people think, well, why
would you have all those oils
and never cook
with them-- but you
can use them with cooked food.
We'll talk about
that in a moment.
But let's go to butter first.
And let's assume we're
talking about a quality
butter, grass-fed
butter for example,
an organic grass-fed butter.
How does that fit in with
the trans fat profiles?
Because you said earlier, it
may have just a trace of it
in and of itself.
But when you heat it, it
seems to be more stable.
A few oils are more stable
than other natural oils.
Can you talk about that?
>>ERASMUS: But
it's not trans fats
that make butter more stable.
>>REGINA: No.
No.
>>ERASMUS: It's that most of the
oil in butter is actually fat.
It's fat because it's
solid at room temperature.
If it's liquid at room
temperature, we call it an oil.
There's no difference
in the chemistry.
But the saturated fats are
hard at room temperature.
And that's why butter is
And saturated fats are not
nearly as sensitive to damage
by light, by oxygen, by heat--
>>REGINA: Like coconut oil, too.
>>ERASMUS: And
coconut as well, yes.
And cocoa butter--
>>REGINA: And cocoa butter.
>>ERASMUS: And shea butter.
So these are all hard fats.
They're used in
cosmetics and some people
use them in food preparation.
Because they contain very little
of the omega-6 and the omega-3,
which are the essential
nutrients from oils.
And any time you
have a fat or oil
with quite a bit of
omega-6 or omega-3 in it,
it will be liquid and will
not go hard in the fridge.
But these are essential.
You have to have
them and you have
to bring them in from outside.
>>REGINA: But as I remember from
years ago-- I read your book.
Oh gosh, I think I
read it in the '90s,
in the mid-90's
initially-- as I recall,
it's that you have to have
the blend of the three
in our diet because of
all the grains and such,
really kind of topped out on
the omega-6s to the exclusion
of the right balance with
omega3s for quite a long time.
Wasn't that the case?
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
Most of our oils that we use
commercially have omega-6s,
but very few of
them have omega-3s.
And if they have omega-3s,
usually not very much.
And there's a very practical
industry reason for that.
Is that omega-3s
are five times more
sensitive to damage
than omega-6s.
>>REGINA: OK.
There you go.
>>ERASMUS: So they're stable.
So 6s are stable
compared to omega-3s.
>>REGINA: And that's sunflower,
safflower, and others.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
And sesame, and
peanuts, and almond.
They all have omega-6s,
but no omega-3.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: Flax is a really
rich source of omega-3.
But it doesn't have
enough omega-6.
>>REGINA: Well that's why
you did your beautiful blend.
The Udo's blend is amazing.
>>ERASMUS: And that's the
point of making a blend.
>>ERASMUS: Now, olive oil
has more 9s, omega-9s.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
Olive oil is mostly omega-9.
Omega-9 is not essential.
Your body can make it.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
>>ERASMUS: It's good fuel.
But it's not essential.
What does "essential" mean?
Essential means can't make it in
the body out of anything else.
Got to have it to
live and be healthy.
Therefore, got to
get it from outside.
If you don't get enough,
your health goes down
and you get deficiency symptoms.
And they're
degenerative in nature
and they get worse with time.
And if you don't get enough,
long enough, you die.
That's how important they are.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: If you
bring them back in,
in adequate quantities
before you die,
then all of your problems
from not getting enough
are reversed because
your life knows
exactly what to do
with them, provided
you take responsibility to
make sure enough of them
land in your body that
life can do its job.
>>REGINA: OK.
The trend now is coconut oil.
I know a lot of raw foodists--
coconut oil, coconut oil,
coconut oil.
Is that more a spectrum of 9,
omega-9s, or omega-6, 3s, what?
>>ERASMUS: Olive oil
has lots of 9, about 10%
omega-6, no omega-3s.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: Coconut,
mostly saturated
fats, many of the medium
chain and short-chain,
and has very little omega-6,
maybe the maximum is about 6%,
and virtually no omega-3s.
There's a number of reasons
why coconut oil is popular.
One is it's harder.
So if you're going
to cook with it,
you get less health damage
than if you use liquid oils.
But you're still
going to get damage.
So my recommendation,
don't do it.
It's a cooling oil.
So it's a very good in summer
because it actually cools you.
It's a tropical oil and
it actually cools you,--
>>REGINA: And in the Ayurveda,
it's popular for pitas
and so forth.
>>ERASMUS: --whereas
omega-3s are warming oils.
And they're very good for
keeping you warm in winter.
But the biggest reason in my
book of why coconut is good
is it's good fuel and it's
better fuel than carbs.
You have to have fuel.
There's only two kinds of
fuel that you mostly have.
It's either carbs or it's fats.
Fats do not turn on fat
production in the body.
Carbs do.
So if you're overweight
and you want fuel
and you don't want to have
fuel that makes you overweight,
that makes you get
cravings so you overeat,
and does all of
that that carbs do,
then you're better off eating
coconut as your source of fuel.
But if you do that, you still
need to get your omega-3s
and 6s--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: --because
those your body
has to have because you
can't live without it.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
That's what I was wondering is
the nutrients we need are not
those that are present in
this new trend of almost
exclusive coconut oil use
in a lot of households.
>>ERASMUS: Correct.
You could say you could
take Udo's Oil as your oil
and do that forever and
take no other oil ever.
You cannot do that with
butter, you cannot do that with
coconut, and you cannot do that
with olive oil because you will
not get the omega-3s and 6s
that you need if you do that.
>>REGINA: And here's
your food pyramid.
And it didn't cost
nearly as much
as the government's
to put it together.
But this is what you've
come after all your years
of research to.
>>ERASMUS: My joke
is they started
making a new food pyramid.
And they were sending out
questionnaires to people.
And I work in nutrition
and I have a profile.
So they sent me one of those.
But you could only nibble around
the edges of the food pyramid.
You couldn't say you know what,
we need to completely change
this stupid thing.
And I got mad.
And I flew to Japan.
And I said, they're
going to not do it right.
I want to do it the
way nature would do it,
not the way government and
commercial interests do it.
But how was it in
nature, because that's
where health came from.
So I said I'm going to
make my own food pyramid.
And it took them two years
to make the new food pyramid
and it took me two hours.
>>REGINA: OK.
So here's your two
hour food pyramid.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
And what is it?
>>REGINA: So lots of
vegetables at the bottom.
>>ERASMUS: You cannot
go wrong on green food.
You will not get fat on them.
They're rich in
minerals, the vitamins.
You cannot go wrong on it.
>>REGINA: And the other
non-starchy vegetables.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And this now,
as I'm looking at this,
this becomes more like
a lot of people-- well,
you'd have to look
at the percentages--
but a lot of people
embrace the Paleo diet,
which is vegetables, lots
of greens and proteins.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah, of course.
Before we had guns
and farms and stuff,
when the men went hunting, they
usually came home without meat.
If you come home without
meat, what do you eat?
Vegetables.
Why?
Because plants don't run away.
They don't fight.
So they're really easy
to hunt down and kill.
So that's the Paleo diet.
>>REGINA: That's the Paleo diet.
So Paleo is a combination
mostly of vegetables,
and proteins, and
fats, and healthy fats.
Well, look at yours here.
That's how your pyramid
is looking also.
>>ERASMUS: Right.
So the second in-- so when
people say what should I eat,
I always say greens,
good oils, and proteins.
Because the proteins get
you essential amino acids.
The good oils get you
essential fatty acids.
You have to have those.
And in the greens, you're going
to get minerals and vitamins
and lots of medicinal things.
So greens, good
fats, and proteins,
that's the Paleo diet, right?
>>REGINA: Um-huh.
Yeah.
>>ERASMUS: Now, I went
up the food pyramid
and said, OK, now fuels.
Carbs and fats are
fuel and so is fruit.
And the more active you
are, the more of those
you can burn without
getting problems.
And the less active you are,
the less of them you should eat.
And the best way to do it is
make good fats your main source
of fuel because they'll
increase your energy levels,
they'll increase
thermogenesis, they'll
turn on body fat burning.
So they keep you from
getting overweight.
They also turn off
fat production.
But you have to
do a fuel switch.
Either you're going to
get your main fuel as oils
or you're going to get
your main fuel as carbs.
If you take good oil
on top of the carbs,
the body makes the carbs.
You can actually put on weight.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: So fuel.
And how much?
Never eat more
fuel than you burn.
>>REGINA: Well,
that makes sense.
Basically, numbers work.
We are an engine
with a certain number
of calories you burn per day.
>>ERASMUS: And then on top--
and why the separation is--
white foods and burned foods,
white flour, white sugar,
white rice--
>>REGINA: Refined carbohydrates.
>>ERASMUS: --I have a
longer list-- white oils,
white proteins like
the protein powder.
It's very highly processed.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: Right.
So those, and the burnt
foods, whatever you fried,
baked-- the fried part
and the baked part--
those reduce or
avoid-- and really I
should take out the
"reduce" and just say avoid.
Because they're
nutrient deficient,
they're processing damage, and
they're going to make you sick.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And then you have of
course other supplements,
up at the top, enzymes,
probiotics, antioxidants,
fiber, phytonutrients,
vitamins, and minerals,
and that makes sense.
Now, that makes sense.
And that's what a lot
of people are turning to
and are losing weight.
And they're feeling
a lot better.
Their minds are
clear and so forth.
>>ERASMUS: And I actually
eat like that And I'm 71.
>>REGINA: And you look
great and you have--
>>ERASMUS: Whoo.
>>REGINA: --a ton of energy.
>>ERASMUS: I have
lots of energy.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's talk about the actual
cooking process itself now.
And I'm so grateful
that I learned
about your work all
those years ago.
>>ERASMUS: Well, you were
the first person who actually
changed her recipes--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: --on the
basis of understanding
the damage done by
oils in cooking.
>>REGINA: I think that
was the only-- yeah.
>>ERASMUS: You're a
pioneer in the deal.
>>REGINA: I think those cooking
shows were the first and up
until very recently
the only shows that
used that particular cooking
method and the cookbooks too.
So I feel very proud that I
was able to offer that service.
>>ERASMUS: And I'm very proud of
you for taking that high road.
>>REGINA: Well once I
knew the information,
it's hard to ignore it.
Yeah.
Except you know what,
setting higher standards
is always a deliberate decision.
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>ERASMUS: And a lot of people
don't make that decision.
And what's beautiful
about it is you
made a deliberate
decision to do something
that's actually in
some ways harder
to do because it doesn't
go along with the flow.
>>REGINA: But it was not
that big a fix honestly.
What I found, there
were some things
that you have to modulate
when you're cooking,
where you're not going
to get this kind of burnt
crust that some people
like on certain items,
where it tastes good.
I mean it was a
simple fix, which
was simply cook your food.
Do what you have to do.
But then add the oils in later
in the presence of liquid
because liquid can only
boil to 212 Fahrenheit.
And how simple is that, really?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
You can't burn food in water.
>>REGINA: No.
You can't burn oils in water.
>>ERASMUS: You can only burn
food when the water goes out
of the food and you need
higher temperatures than water
to do that.
And oil, of course, boils at
a much higher temperature.
So instead of 212, it's
like 245, or 180 even.
>>REGINA: I didn't find it
really that big a switch.
And the viewers-- I had a lot of
viewers across America, Canada,
and Australia and
no one complained
that it was too
complicated to do.
>>ERASMUS: I was inspired by
you doing that because I thought
you were inspired to do it.
>>REGINA: So as
it turns out, what
I realized in the
process-- and I
wrote about this
in my cookbooks--
was that the foods,
especially when you're dealing
with vegetables, you're doing
cooked vegetable dishes,
when you are sauteing
your onions, peppers,
and so forth, I would
saute it in a liquid
of some kind, either
water or a broth.
And then because I like
the richness and flavor
of the oils, add them in toward
the very end of that process,
but not after it was
fully dehydrated.
The foods had a
sparkle and retained
their own natural
flavor and sparkle,
that they lose when you're
sauteing in oils and fats.
>>ERASMUS: In fact, I
remember you telling me
the only thing you can't do
without oils is burn your food.
>>REGINA: Absolutely true.
OK.
Now let's talk about--
there's a subject
that I'm sure some people
watching are thinking.
OK, we've been talking
about Udo's Oil.
And there are other flaxseed
oils out there as well.
But then there are
krill oils and there
are other oils that are
made from fish, fish oils.
Why do you prefer
vegetable based?
Others argue you have
to have fish base?
So what's the truth on
this from your perspective?
>>ERASMUS: The fish
oil, flax oil argument
has been misrepresented
from the week
that we started making flax oil.
>>REGINA: OK.
So there's that 3-6-9 blend.
>>ERASMUS: And it
was misrepresented
by people in the
fish oil industry.
And here's what's wrong
with the argument.
They said, oh, the body
can't convert flax.
You got to have fish oil.
Here's what's wrong
with the argument.
We're doing two completely
different things.
When you talk
about supplements--
do you take supplements?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: OK.
So do you ever take supplement
and just forget about the food?
I mean for long term?
>>REGINA: No.
>>ERASMUS: No.
Why not?
>>REGINA: Because you need food.
>>ERASMUS: Because
it's completely crazy.
>>REGINA: Because it's crazy.
Yeah.
>>ERASMUS: So you eat your food.
>>REGINA: You need it
for fuel and many things.
>>ERASMUS: So food
is your basis.
And then you supplement
your food with a supplement.
That's why it's called
a "supplement"--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ERASMUS: --not a "instead of."
When it comes to
oils, that's true too.
You have food oils and
you have supplement oils.
Fish is a supplement oil.
Krill is a supplement oil.
Udo's Oil is a food oil.
>>REGINA: Why is one a food.
Why?
Why is that considered
a food oil, versus that
from a fish, a supplement?
>>ERASMUS: Because the
amount that you need.
>>REGINA: I see.
Because one is in a
minute-- and Udo's Oil,
you can use in salads.
You take it as a food.
>>ERASMUS: Well, what I do is I
recommend that people take two
to four tablespoons of the
Udo's Oil, mixed in food,
spread out over the
course of the day.
That's about the same amount as
they take of the cooking oils.
Those are not supplement oils.
Those are cooking
oil, food oils.
>>REGINA: Food oils.
>>ERASMUS: And what I'm saying
is get rid of those oils
because they're
damaged and toxic.
And replace them with oils
made with health in mind.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: Don't fry the
oils made with health in mind
then you'll wreck them
and make them toxic.
>>REGINA: Because we
didn't really go into that.
Talk about the temperature.
Yeah, go ahead.
>>ERASMUS: I'll do
that in a second.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: OK.
So you're getting
your food oils.
And then you can take a
supplement on top of that.
You take maybe 1 to 3 grams.
By the way, two to four
tablespoons, 28 to 56 grams.
So that's quite a bit.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's quite a bit.
>>ERASMUS: Fish oil,
it's like 1 to 3 grams
is what they recommend.
That's the difference
between food and supplement.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: So when you've got
your food base done properly,
then you can take a
supplement and see
if you get further benefits.
>>REGINA: And that would
be like the krill oil
or something like that.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
And I prefer krill to fish
because krill is not damaged.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK.
>>ERASMUS: So then if
you get benefits from it,
well then you stick with it.
And if you don't
get any benefits,
then you don't need it.
Because if you get enough
of the omega-3s and 6s
in their plant-based
form, you have
all the genes in your body to
convert them into EPA and DHA,
which is what you get in the
supplements, in your own body.
The biggest problem is we don't
get enough starting material
for the conversion
of the omega-3s.
So I said let's
fix that problem.
Not only that, but more
problems, more health problems,
come from getting a bad
food oil foundation than
come from whether you
take a supplement or not.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ERASMUS: So let's fix
the big problem first.
If you have a problem with
your food oil foundation,
a supplement will not fix that.
You have to fix the foundation.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: That's
why I like that.
Now in terms of how
to use it in terms
of the temperature,
the high temperature,
oils are damaged by light,
by oxygen, and by heat.
I've already said that
and I'll keep saying it.
>>REGINA: So let's say we get
those beautiful, fresh oils
and now you want
to saute something.
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
Well, I have a slogan for that.
Fried oils fry health.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: OK.
Oils are vindictive.
They're going to treat
you like you treat them.
If you fry them,
they'll fry you.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ERASMUS: If you
treat them with care,
they will take care of you.
It's very simple.
>>REGINA: So really, just
don't do that to them.
Don't heat them.
>>ERASMUS: Don't do it.
No.
>>REGINA: You can heat
them to a small extent.
>>ERASMUS: Frying
is the worst thing
we have ever invented
to do to our food
in all of human history,
the single worst thing.
Why?
Because when you fry, you burn.
You burn starches, you burn
proteins, you burn the oils.
And when you do that,
you change molecules.
Those molecules
accumulate in the body.
The body doesn't know
what to do with them.
They create inflammation.
Inflammation is a
background factor
behind most of the
degenerative conditions.
>>REGINA: True.
>>ERASMUS: And we call them
diseases of civilization
sometimes or diseases
of processing
because it's the processing
that changes the molecules.
And the increased cancer--
starch turns into acrylamide.
Proteins turn into acrolein
and other toxic molecules.
And the other molecules, there's
a whole bunch of different ways
it's damaged.
All three of them,
independent of the others,
increase risk of cancer.
That's what the research says.
I'm not making this up.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ERASMUS: And in
my view, processing
is the thing where most of
our degenerative diseases
come from.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ERASMUS: You start with
fresh, whole, raw, organic.
That's nature's standard.
That's how every creature eats
except for us and the animals
that we feed.
>>REGINA: That's true.
>>ERASMUS: Fresh,
whole, raw, organic.
And every step you
take away from that
will cost you something
in health at some point.
And if you don't
like it, then you
take steps back in the direction
of fresh, whole, raw, organic
again.
And you will get something back
in health when you do that.
>>REGINA: Very true.
>>ERASMUS: So you go from
frying to cooking in water.
You go from cooking
in water to steaming.
You go from steaming to
fresh, whole, raw, organic
as much as you can.
If it's contaminated of course,
you have to kill the bugs.
But you probably
shouldn't be eating
if it is contaminated,
dead or alive.
>>REGINA: No.
It makes perfect sense.
And then someone else has picked
up on your cooking methods.
Alan wrote-- how do you
say his name, Roettinger?
>>ERASMUS: Roettinger.
>>REGINA: Roettinger.
>>ERASMUS: Roettinger, yeah.
>>REGINA: And you have this
new book, "Omega 3 Cuisine."
And he's a top-notch chef.
And there is some really--
I just went through here.
In fact, I'm going to steal it.
And there's some really--
>>ERASMUS: Yeah.
You can take it.
>>REGINA: There's some
lovely recipes in here.
You realize I did
this-- I mean I've
done it for years and years.
It's not a big
adjustment in the diet
and everything
tastes just fabulous.
No onion rings, obviously.
>>ERASMUS: But in fact if
you don't burn the food,
you actually get so much
more of the subtle nuances
of flavors in foods.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm saying.
You do.
>>ERASMUS: And you
kill those with burnt.
>>REGINA: That's true.
You can still taste--
I always called
it the sparkle in the food.
Udo, we're just
about out of time.
And just one more--
anything else that you
want to add to this that we
haven't touched on already?
>>ERASMUS: Well, yes.
But now, that goes far afield.
I get asked all
the time why is it
that people know a lot of things
that they could do for better
health and they don't do them?
And--
>>REGINA: That's true.
>>ERASMUS: --I've
thought about that a lot.
It's always comes down to
if your life is crappy,
you're not going
to take care of it.
So the reason people don't
do what they know to do
is because they don't
feel good enough
within themselves
about being alive.
And so I'm really big
on cultivating some way
to be fully present
in your own life.
And when you are, you get
what an incredible gift it is.
And then you're
going to be much more
likely to take care of
the body because you
want to prolong the beauty of
the experience of being alive.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And thank you for making
that final comment
because it's true.
The more depressed
we are, the more
we reach for the
worst quality of foods
to get an artificial
buzz from it.
And quite the
opposite when you're
feeling good about life
and you're committed to it.
And you're a wonderful
example of that.
>>ERASMUS: Thank you.
>>REGINA: And at
71, wow, what skin.
And that's just shining
through the rest of it.
Thank you so much, Udo.
>>ERASMUS: Thank you, Regina.
I hope this has been helpful.
I think there has been an
intentional obstruction
of the truth in this
particular area or else
at least willful ignorance.
I personally go
way out of my way
to find the most pristine oils.
And now you know that you
can do the same as well.
Meanwhile to connect
with Udo's book,
you can go to Amazon.com or
any other major bookseller,
as the new book.
The old one, "Fats That
Heal, Fats That Kill,"
the original is the
bible of fats and oils.
His healthy fats
products are also
available at health food
stores around the world,
in many, many countries.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]